We drove by this um this this factory
looking building on the interstate and
my wife goes hey what is that that's new
and it was called Ascend and I go wonder
if that's a church go look it up and so
she Googles it. It's a marijuana
dispensary
>> which is like the most
>> that's the Yeah, that's the tough
question. Non-denominational church or
marijuana dispensary?
>> Is a religious [music] revival happening
in America right now?
>> Christian resurgence. So the headline is
that more young people are going to
church, which is great news. [music]
>> Is political polarization making
Americans more secular or more
religious?
>> We're called to be biblical and we're
called to be political.
>> You get aligned with other men that are
like, "Hey, I actually have the same
views as you." And it's like, it's okay
to have that view.
>> More young women are abandoning religion
[music] than men.
>> Christ always America first. That is
what we stand for. and just how weird is
the [music] American religious future
likely to become?
>> If you're a Christian and don't have
these apps, you're missing out big time.
>> My guest today is the perfect person to
[music] help answer all of these
questions. Ryan Burge has direct
experience with some of the decline in
American [music] Christianity. He's
also, in my own opinion, the best data
analyst [music]
tracking trends in American religion
right now. It's going to be a rough 15
minutes for those people who don't like
graphs. Ryan Burge, welcome [music] to
Interesting Times.
>> It's my absolute pleasure to be here.
>> So, I want to start just by talking
about the big recent religious trends in
American life and especially the claim
that secularization might be going into
reverse or even that revival is in the
air. But before we talk revival, I want
to start by defining a very important
term for understanding what's been
happening in the US for the last 20
years. And that term is nun and I do not
mean Catholic nuns, but something else.
What is a nun? Yeah. So nuns n o n ne
are people who identify with no
religious tradition. What that means is
we ask a question about affiliation and
they describe their religion as atheist,
agnostic, or nothing in particular. And
that third piece is the one that we
forget about a lot. These are people who
look at all the options, Protestant,
Catholic, Muslim, Mormon, and they kind
of just shrug their shoulders and say,
"I'm not a Christian, but I'm not an
atheist either." And they just click
none of the above. So the nuns are those
three groups together, atheist,
agnostic, nothing in particular. Uh, and
that group has grown from 5% of America
in 1972 to about 30% of America today.
It's the biggest social movement
happening in America or happened in
America over the last 30 years that we
just don't talk about that much. I don't
know if I agree that we don't talk about
it that much. I feel like commentary on
religion as long as I've been a pundit
has been dominated by the sense that
America is getting less religious,
people are disaffiliating.
But then something changed right around
2020 2021.
>> I think we're moving into a new era of
what's happening with American religion.
So it was rapid secularization from 1991
to 2020. Now we're in a period of
stasis. Share of Americans who are
non-religious has really stuck at that
same level around 30%. The share of
Americans who are Christians is in the
low 60s, maybe 63 or 65%. And it's been
that way for the last 5 years now. This
is a plateau, not a reversal. This is
not a revival. The the directions are
not going the they're not reversing
themselves. They're just staying where
they are right now.
>> Give me some speculation though about
why we've seen the plateau. Like why do
you think it seems like there is a sort
of a basically just a chronological
pattern where for a while you could just
count on
>> each generation being substantially less
religious than the previous generation.
And with Gen Z and the millennials, they
are less religious, but it's just not as
strong a pattern as you've seen before.
And I know this is outside the realm of
data. I'm going to do this to you
repeatedly in the interview, but did
something change in 2017 to 2025 that
would that would put a floor under
religion that would sort of make it seem
a little more resilient?
>> Yeah. The way I I think about it is, you
know, there's a bedrock of American
religion that I don't think exists in
any other western country. You know,
what's happened over the last 30 years
is a lot of people were loosely
affiliated. You know, they say they were
Protestant or Catholic. They go to mass
once every two or three years. Uh and
they would say they're Catholic or
Protestant because that's culturally
acceptable. But as times have changed
and the nuns have continued to rise, it
used to be you didn't want to say you
were an atheist. There's there's a lot
of stigma against it. And now there's
>> God God didn't like it too, right?
Exactly. People were nervous
>> and America didn't like it, you know,
because think about in the 50s and 60s7s
we had the Cold War. We were fighting
against communism which was atheistic.
Right. So there was a there was sort of
a a stigma that we could not get over
and now over the last 30 years that
stigma went away and more and more
people I think were actually being
honest when they took surveys and saying
they were non-religious. But once you
scoop off all that loose top soil, those
marginally attached people, you get
closer and closer to bedrock. And I
think what we've realized is there's a
core of religiosity in America. I mean,
I just don't see a future in America
where the share of Americans who are
non-religious rises above 50%. I mean,
there's just nothing in the data that
says that when if you would asked me,
you know, 10 or 15 years ago, I would
have said numbers keep going up. And
that's not happening now. How do how
does the identification numbers interact
with actual data on church attendance
which I know is itself it's really hard
to measure. People also will say they go
to mass or church or synagogue more than
they really do. Um but is it something
where religious identification has
fallen faster than church attendance or
has attendance declined meaningfully in
the last 20 years?
>> So we we think about religion with three
components. Behavior, belief and
belonging. So, so behaviors like we talk
church attendance that's actually
following the fastest of all of them. So
the way we think about it is behavior is
the first one that goes and then usually
it follows belonging and then belief is
sort of behind all those things. If you
look at never attending people, they
actually are more likely to say God
exists without any doubts than they are
to say God doesn't exist at all. So
there's still this core of belief in
America that I you don't see that in the
rest of the world
>> or you don't see it in Western Europe. I
mean when we're making these comparison
>> exactly Western Europe are comparison
>> India subsaharan Africa you see plenty
of religious belief
>> absolutely
>> for historical context I think there's a
lot of people maybe especially secular
people who sort of imagine that the
story of religion in America is one
where the country just sort of starts
out super religious you know maybe it's
the Puritans whoever else and just has
gradually become more secular over time
>> in fact America uh has gotten more
religious at various moments across its
history. And so you have much more of
kind of a cycle of revival, decline,
revival, decline, right? Rather than
sort of just a long narrative of
secularization. I think in American
religion, it is not a straight line.
Like the idea that we're going to just
slide towards secularization, the
pendulum definitely swung towards
secularization. I mean the new atheist
movement you know 15 20 years ago was
all the rage and now those guys are
minor players in this conversation. I do
feel like I mean we can't measure vibes.
This is where we get in trouble as
social scientists but the vibes around
religion have shifted from the new
atheists are the coolest thing ever to
those guys are have tired ideas and we
should at least reconsider the role of
religion whether it be cultural
Christianity seems to be on the march
right now. maybe not devout, you know,
attending Christianity, but the the
value of religion in a functioning
society,
>> right? And so in some of these vibes
based debates,
>> you have been the guy with the data, you
know, critiquing the vibe. That's one
one reason I wanted to talk to you,
right, that people will say, "Oh, you
know, the country is turning back to
Christianity." And you're there to say,
"Sorry, it's a plateau. No big evidence
of people going back to church." I want
to talk about a few sort of
subcategories though within that larger
narrative where it seems to me like
something genuinely novel is happening.
Um so let's start by talking about men
versus women.
>> What is the historical pattern of
gendered behavior around religion and
how is that changing? Maybe
>> in most countries where we can get data
women are more religious than men. Now,
not dramatically so, but this is
something we sort of know in social
sciences that women are more religious
than men. Uh,
>> is this just is this true across
religions? Like, is this true in Islamic
countries versus Christian countries or
is it mostly a Christian phenomenon?
>> It's mostly a Christian thing that women
are more religious than men. What's
funny is we don't know why. Like,
there's all these interesting theories
about biological theories. There's, you
know, anthropological theories like
women needed someone to help them take
care of the kids and church provided
this kind of social safety net for them.
We don't really know why. We just know
that women are more religious than men.
But what we're seeing, interestingly
enough, among Gen Z is that women are
still leaving the church at an
incredibly rapid rate. And men are still
leaving, but at a slower rate. And what
that ends up being is the religiosity of
Gen Z men and women is probably about
the same. Now, it's not that men are
returning to church. This is a really
important point. The data does not say,
>> well, some some men are, right? some
are,
>> but in the aggregate,
>> in the aggregate, we're not seeing Gen Z
men become more religious. It's just
they're secularizing slower than young
women are, and that's allowing those
lines to cross when it comes to
religiosity.
>> Now, can you tell in the data whether
this is what this means for specific
churches? Right? So, for instance, you
know, one of my colleagues uh just wrote
a big story that I [snorts] think you
commented on about uh Eastern Orthodoxy
in America, right? which is a very small
part of American religion. Uh but there
are a lot of stories and I've heard them
myself about male converts to Eastern
Orthodoxy being a big a big thing.
Right? So that would be a small example
where you might say, okay, you have men
sticking with Christianity or returning
to it in particular places, but it's
going to create a dynamic where some
churches are much more male and some
churches are much more female. The
Orthodox story is interesting, don't get
me wrong, but we have to put them in
context. Like there's less than a
million people going to Orthodox church
in America. Of a country of 330 million
people, Southern Baptist, there's 7
million Southern Baptists who go to
church every Sunday. So like let's let's
put things in their proper orbit. My job
is to sort of like not look at the
outliers. It's to look at the middle of
the distribution. And I think the
reality is what's going to happen in the
future is my church at the end, it was
75% women. And I think that's what a lot
of these churches are dealing with right
now because they're older and women tend
to live longer than men do. I think that
balance might sort of you get closer to
evening out over time. But I still think
the reality is that American religion,
mainstream American religion, is still
going to be majority female because
boomer women are more religious than
boomer men and Gen X and millennials. So
this is a small trend that we would need
to see continue for decades to actually
see a difference you would feel on the
ground if you went to an average church.
Do you think that that balancing out is
good for churches? It it seems like you
can tell you can tell a lot of different
stories, right? But one story would be
okay, it's obviously good for churches
to have more men in the pews, but if
organized religion generally,
Christianity in particular has a
specific problem losing young women,
then you get a kind of, you know,
broastic would be patriarchal culture in
these churches. And maybe it accelerates
a female exodus.
Or alternatively, you say, "Look, no,
actually, if you have a lot of churches
that are suddenly 50/50 male, female,
these are the only institutions in
American life maybe that might have that
kind of balance. You get more marriages,
more successful communities.
>> Which of those two stories sounds more
realistic to you?" I mean, a 50/50 is a
good outcome, but you've got to
understand the types of Christianity
that are still dominant in American
life, which is evangelicalism and the
Catholic Church, are both maledominated
across the board. Uh, you know,
>> male-dominated in in their hierarchies
and in their pastoral leadership, but
not in who goes to mass and and church.
>> Exactly. Right. The pews, it's a lot
more women. In the pulpits, it's a lot.
It's almost all men. That is not
changing demonstrabably, I think, over
the next 20 or 30 years. But I will say
it's probably not a bad thing if you're
a young man or a young woman trying to
find someone to marry and have kids and
build a life with when there's 50/50
young men and young women in the pews.
In that way, I think it's actually a
very good thing. If you walked into a
church and it was 90% Gen Z men and 10%
Gen Z women, that's a real problem. I
mean, 50/50 is a lot.
>> Well, for the men.
>> Well, yeah. I mean,
>> but for the future of the church, too,
though, because then you become
unattractive to young women because they
walk in and go, "Whoa, dude. there's no
place for me here. Churches need to they
need to be receptive to all kinds of
people. And so that 50/50 future I think
is actually probably a good thing if it
holds. That's the most important thing.
If these Gen Z men maintain this habit
throughout the rest of their life, which
I mean that's obviously an open question
right now.
>> Yeah. All right. Let's talk about class
after gender.
>> Yeah.
>> Again, I think there's a like story that
women are more likely to go to church or
be religious than men. There's a
long-standing story that's very popular
among political pundits that says,
"Okay, America is a nation with a
secular elite and a a very religious
lower middle class or working class."
The reality is is more complicated,
right? Talk about class and education
and American religion.
>> In America, the data is really clear on
this. Educated people are actually more
likely to go to church than less
educated people are. educated people are
more likely to identify with any
religious tradition compared to
uneducated people. Um, actually the
ideal uh combination of of education and
income for church attendance is people
with a bachelor's degree making between
60 and $100,000 per year. So sort of
like white collar upper middle class
people. Those those evangelical
megaurches you drive by in the suburbs,
you know, called the Journey in the
Bridge. Guess who's the the modal
member?
>> Elevate.
>> Elevate. Like we drove by this um this
this factory looking building on the
interstate and my wife goes hey what is
that that's new and it was called Ascend
and I go wonder if that's a church go
look it up and so she Googles it. It's a
marijuana dispensary
>> which is like the most
>> that's the Yeah, that's the tough
question. Non-denominational church or
marijuana dispensary?
>> You can never figure it out. But guess
what? The kind of people who would go to
the non-denominational church are, you
know, like suburban um white upper
middle class educated folks. That's what
religion has become in America is it's
the it's the top end of the spectrum,
not the bottom end of the spectrum. And
I think the problem here is we get a lot
of our theories from Europe and in
Europe it's the opposite. You the
educated people are the least likely to
go and the less educated people are the
more likely to go. So religion in
America does not work at all like
religion in Europe does.
>> That doesn't quite hold though, right?
When you go into graduate and sort of
post postgraduate degrees, right? it
still is the case that the kind of int
would be intelligencia right uh is
slightly more secular and that religious
practice is more common middle to upper
middle class so I I'm going to give you
anecdotes in response right one of the
aspects of this kind of vibes-based
conversation about revival in America
>> is about people with PhDs the
intelligencia because in that zone you
just have a lot of stories
Right now I I go to college campuses and
you know people running the the local
Catholic parish or student group will
say you know we had x number of converts
among the undergrads and grad students
this year and I did not hear those
stories 10 or 15 years ago. Do you think
that there's any scenario where the
American elite is is actually getting
more religious in a concrete way? I I do
think that there's a future in which
their religiosity does increase, but I
I'm not sure that we can pin it on just
like their belief in the Bible or God is
what's driving that. Religion is
obviously a theological pursuit.
Absolutely.
>> Right.
>> It's also a social pursuit though. Like
people realize that going to church does
all kinds of good things for them
outside of just saving their soul from
eternal damnation. Right. It allows them
to make friends. It allows them to find
a partner. It also allows them to I need
a veterinarian. I need a dentist. Oh,
hey, you know, Dr. So and so sits in the
pew too behind you. Just go talk to him.
It creates this social connection. I
think educated, they don't realize this
like they don't vocalize this and it
never clicks in their head of why
they're doing these things. But what we
see over and over again is that dropping
out begets dropping out. So dropping out
of religion, like the nothing in
particular group we're talking about,
they're the very lowest level of
educational attainment. Only 25% of them
have four-year college degrees. So
they're they're dropping out of
education, they're dropping out of
religion, and they're dropping out of
politics. So they're they're basically
isolating themselves from American
society. And I think education, social
trust, all institutional trusts are all
sort of locked together in this matrix
of things that make you either more
willing to engage in polite society or
less willing to engage in polite
society. Educated people have a level of
trust that less educated people do not.
>> I mean, this this connects to what you
were saying. For a lot of people, it
seems like disaffiliating from religion
is just a way of sort of being
disconnected from from institutions. And
then as religion either remains res
resilient or becomes more potent in the
upper middle class, it becomes sort of
in a way, pardon my language, a sign of
like having your together, right?
>> Absolutely. Like that's what I always
tell people if you want to know who goes
to church, it's educated people who have
middle class incomes are married with
children. That is the the golden path we
talk about, you know, like what leads
you to success in life leads you to
church.
>> This is a very sort of
>> economistic
secularish frame for understanding
religion. So my last question about
possible sources of revivalism, let's
let's make it a little weirder, right?
seems like one of Well, let's talk about
sort of non-Christian and post-Christian
spiritualities because it definitely
seems like whatever is going on with the
vibes, some of it has people newly
interested in
astrology, the paranormal, witchcraft,
UFOs. I tell this story a lot, but I go
into my local Barnes & Noble and it used
to be that there was, you know, one one
shelf that you would call like pagan
paganism or witchcraft or something. And
now it's like four or five shelves of
tarot cards and magic and all all these
things. Now I, you know, live in New
England haunted by witchcraft for
hundreds of years, but but still
something there has shifted. What do you
make of sort of non-Christian or
post-Christian
religion or spirituality as sort of a
source of
cultural significance for religious
belief? So, this is something that I got
asked out a lot like people are
replacing religion with these new
spiritual practices. And so, we did a
survey of 12,000 non-religious people
and we asked them, you know, how
important is spirituality to you from
not at all important to very important.
We gave them a list of practices like
tarot, yoga, astrology, meditation, all
these things. 25% of them of the
non-religious people said spirituality
is very important. It was 60% of
religious people. So the more religious
you are, the more spiritual you are. And
this idea there's this huge number of
Americans who are spiritual but not
religious, we call them espionr is is
really not there in the data. So this
idea they're replacing it is actually
false. They're not replacing religion
with spirituality. They're replacing
religion with with nothing is what it
looks like. So, does that mean that
those shelves in my Barnes & Noble
reflect mostly synratism? Like, it's
just more people who are who are sort of
defining themselves officially as
Protestant or Catholic, maybe going to
church, but they're also suddenly
interested in tarot cards and astrology.
Two things I would say to that. One,
yes, I think there's a lot of people who
are like buffet Catholics, right? Like,
I'll take this piece from here and they
go to mysticism for this. And so, I
think that's part of it. The other part
of it is I think that the people who are
really committed are really committed
and buy a lot of literature. You don't
have to have too many people in that
core to to make that market actually
work. I think that's actually probably
what's happening here is a small group
of very committed people are. And and
listen, a lot of that kind of leans
toward the female side, you know, like a
lot of Wiccans are females. And guess
who the number one buyer of books are?
It's women. So there is so there is
potentially a a kind of potent version
of American [snorts] paganism. It's just
numerically pretty small. It's very
small and it's very loud. So they're
sort of over represented on places like
social media. So in our minds we we make
it a lot bigger. The share of Americans
who are not Christian and are not none
is probably 7% of the country right now.
The share of Americans who are
Latter-day Saint in this country is 1%.
I mean, it's it's we we we take these
small religious groups, sort of blow
them up in our minds and act like
they're much bigger because Christianity
is the norm. We're just used to what
that is. Even today, 60% of Americans
are Christians. Like, it's a for every
one Muslim in America, there's 60
Christians. Like, we've got to be clear
about how the size of these groups. Not
saying that Muslims don't matter or
Latter-day Saints don't matter. It's
just important to know in the relative
context of macro religion in America,
they're a rounding error compared to
Christianity. Let's talk about that that
big number because the big story of the
last two generations is one of decline.
Some big parts of American religion have
declined to a point where it's hard to
imagine them coming back in a big way.
And the biggest of them all is the
Protestant mainline which is the set of
denominations,
Methodist,
Baptist, Lutheran, Presbyterian,
Episcopalian, you know, that were
basically the dominant religious force
in American life for a very long time.
Um, and my own theory, and it's
obviously not mine alone, is that the
decline of the mainline is itself an
underrated part of our present
polarization and derangement that we
used to have this set of sort of
centering religious institutions that
don't exist in to the same degree and on
the same scale anymore. And this is
something that you've experienced
directly. You were a mainline Protestant
pastor Y
>> at the First Baptist Church of Mount
Vernon, Illinois.
>> Correct.
>> Just talk for a minute about that
experience and what happened to that
church.
>> Yeah. So, I took over that church in I
was uh 24 years old. I
>> So, you had gone to seminary?
>> No. No.
>> God bless the Baptist. We need no
training.
>> No training. Good. Um, I started as a
youth pastor for three years as a
part-time job and then I became a pastor
because listen in rural America there's
a supply and demand problem when it
comes to pastors and I was willing to
raise my hand and say I'll go do it. So
I joined First Baptist in 2006 they had
about 50 people on an average Sunday and
this is a congregation. This is a 14,000
foot building on 7 and 12 acres of
ground. When they built the building in
the 1960s there were 300 people on an
average Sunday. It was one of the
pillars of the community. like all the
teachers and the lawyers and the doctors
were part of this church and it was a
shell of itself when I got there at 50
people.
>> This is Northern Baptist,
>> American Baptist.
>> American Baptist, but it's it's not the
Southern Baptist Convention.
>> We are the mainline flavor of Baptist
faith and and so some churches were
LGBTQ affirming, some churches had
female pastors, but it was up to the
local church to decide that. So, every
church is a little bit different on
their theology. In Southern Baptist, you
can't have female pastors, you can't do
gay weddings. So my church, you know,
kind of slid into, you know, obscurity
over time. You know, when you walk in
and you see a whole bunch of gray hair
and no kids, that's bad. You know, I was
there for 17 years. In the last year, we
would have 10 or 12 on a good Sunday. We
actually had to give our building away
to a private Christian school cuz we
couldn't afford to pay the insurance and
the upkeep and the maintenance and all
those things. And then eventually we
decided this is sort of a not good use
of our time and resources. So, you know,
right after Easter, we voted to close
and we were going to close as close to
our anniversary as possible. The church
was founded in 1868 and it closed in in
2024. And uh at the end, we had about 28
people on the membership role and maybe
10 or 12 actual attenders on a regular
Sunday.
>> Why?
>> Cuz I'm a bad pastor.
>> I mean, I didn't want to I didn't want
to say the obvious, right?
>> I'm the worst pastor in the history of
the world. I tell people I've been a
part of three churches and two of them
don't exist anymore. So if you want your
church to close down, hire me and give
it like 5 years and it'll be done. But
but listen, cuz if you look at macro
level religion, guess what? Christianity
America has been in decline. Well, it
was in decline for, you know, 30 years.
Um the mainline, which is what my church
was, has been in absolute freefall for
the last 70 years. There's some data
from the 1950s that say over half of
Americans were on the membership roles
of a mainline church in 1958. Today,
it's 8 8 and a half% of Americans are
mainline Protestant. And in a lot of
these traditions, the average age is
about 60 years old, which is certainly
not good for the future of a church. But
I was also in a community that's the
same size today as it was in 1950. So
we're not growing, right? Christianity
is not growing. It's like we had all
these things working against us. And
there are tens of thousands of churches
in those exact same positions right now.
They're just like holding on for dear
life as they slide toward closure like
my church did.
>> So why did this hit the mainline in
particular so hard? why such a decline
so fast for this you know big and pretty
diverse group of churches right there
are big differences between or were
between Episcopalians congregationalists
Presbyterians and American Baptists and
yet all of them have experienced this
kind of decline
>> yeah so there's a an article written by
JP Drath in 1995 and uh a scientific
journal where he basically makes the
argument the mainline declined because
it succeeded so well it got the average
American to accept their worldview of
religious pluralism ism and individual
freedom and free speech. And it used to
be the mainline stood apart from the
average American as being different. And
then when the average American adopted
all these mainline principles, there was
no differentiating factor between the
mainline and the average American. And
that's why evangelicalism has done so
well, by the way, cuz it's clearly stood
apart from the rest of the culture and
said there's us and there's them. We are
not them and they are not us. Let's have
these distinctive beliefs on gay
marriage, on female pastors. And some
people are drawn to that difference. A
guy told me once, he goes, "Listen, I
went to a mainline church for a long
time, but it felt like a country club
with Jesus. I'd rather just go to the
country club, you know, because the
main's always been sort of squishy on
these things." You know, the Southern
Baptists are 80% Republicans at this
point. White Southern Baptists are 80%
Republicans. I think in some ways by
them not choosing a side in the
political, you know, fight that we're in
right now, people want to go to a place
that's coded left or right. And the
mainline resisted all that. And I think
that's actually part of their demise is
because people couldn't figure out what
they are.
>> So often you'll hear a narrative that
says churches decline because they
become too politicized. And I've made
versions of that argument myself. I've
said
I I've argued that you could see it
applying to both left and right. Seems
to me though like you're saying that in
certain ways political tribalization can
be a source of strength, right? I mean
so which which is it? Is it does
polarization
bad for Christianity or churches
succeeding by leaning into it?
>> I think it could be good for the church
but bad for the country. Like I think
let me make this point clear. Most
pastors are not even evangelical pastors
are not standing up at the pulpit on
Sunday and saying the Trump
administration's great. we support their
immigration policy. Like this is a this
is a misconception that people who do
not grow up in religion have about
religion is like I always say like
evangelicals are, you know, don't go to
that many political meetings and the
first comment is like, "Yeah, they do
every Sunday." And I'm like, "No, no,
you haven't been to an evangelical
church. They're not being overtly
political for now." They might talk
about their view on marriage or their
view on gender or something like that,
but it's not inherently political like
that.
>> Where the politics comes from in a lot
of these churches is the bottom up. It's
coming from the pews. It's coming from
the Bible study. It's coming from the
parking lots and the hallways when
people that's what happened in my
church. I never talked about politics
from the pulpit. But people before and
after church, I'd hear them talk all the
time about politics and it was, you
know, it was it was Republican politics
to be quite honest with you because I'm
in a Republican area. That's what's
happening a lot of these churches.
What's happened in America, especially
white Christianity is coded as
Republican. And that's not always been
the case. By the way, I think this is
this is a point that people forget is
even in the 1980s among the white
evangelical church, the share of who are
Republicans, the share of Democrats was
the same. Yeah.
>> Same in the mainline church. So what
we're seeing here is really a unique
moment. The number one predictor of
whether you're going to be religious or
not in America. But besides obviously
the religion questions is what is your
political ideology? If you're a liberal,
5050 chance you're a non-religious
person. If you're a conservative, it's
about a 12% chance that you're a
non-religious person. I think people are
being attracted to church because they
see it in America, especially white
people, as being a conservative
institution. And we're even seeing the
rise of people say they're evangelical
who don't go to church because they like
what the word evangelical means. And so
what what religion's become is another
tribal marker of who you vote for on
election day as opposed to, you know,
what it used to be. Why does
politicization and polarization seem to
help conservative churches more than
liberal churches?
>> I think young people think that like I'm
a liberal so I'm going to be
irreligious. They don't even accept the
possibility that you can be a liberal
Christian anymore. And I think this is
the problem with the mainline is they
thought the solution to the the
right-wing movement of the evangelical
movement is to become super leftwing. I
think a lot of Americans are actually
searching for a church that's relatively
apolitical in the pulpit and the pews.
So, here's what I tell people. I go, if
if you are fine with your church having
a rainbow flag out front, but you're not
happy with another pastor having a MAGA
hat in the pulpit,
there's a problem here. The Catholic
Church,
for various reasons, has sort of, I
think, worked harder to try to present
itself as above politics. you have, you
know, clearly strong white Catholic
support for Republicans, but you know,
the church is going to issue criticisms
of Trump's immigration policy and so on.
But is there a strategy apart from
leaning into tribalism that you would
actually recommend to pastors and
leaders?
>> I think this is the hard thing is how do
you be aggressively apolitical?
>> I think there's ways to do it. And I
think actually the Catholic Church is is
a great example of how they could lean
more into the consistent ethic of life.
I tell my students about this by the way
for those listening. It's the idea that
life should be protected at beginning,
middle, and end. So from natural
conception and natural death. Catholic
church is opposed to abortion, opposed
to birth control, but also opposed to um
the death penalty. It's also opposed to
unjust wars and physician assisted
suicide. I I explain that to my
students. They go, "Yeah, I don't really
know if I agree with it, but I respect
that position. It helps me think about
these issues of life and death in a way
that I've not thought about them
before." like helping people sort of
think holistically about these things
but not being super like directed like
well this is where the Trump
administration violates the consistent
ethic of life is a better way to go
about it. Let them make the connections
not you make the connection.
>> Yeah. But that I mean that's that's a
hard balance to strike. And I feel like
you often get, you know, it's just as
easy to get a dynamic where
um your consistent ethic ends up
alienating people all over the spectrum,
right? It's like, look, the the Catholic
bishops take a lot of flack from
political conservatives for policies
that, you know, that are seen as liberal
or left-wing, especially around
immigration, but also around the
environment. But at the same time, they
win no friends on the progressive left
by being against euthanasia and abortion
um and you know whatever exciting
biotechnological evils await in the
future, right? So that it just seems
like you can end up again just talking
sort of uh in terms of practical
pastoral strategy in a polarized
environment, you can end up in kind of a
sour spot, right? Even when you're
trying to be as holistic as possible in
your message.
>> Yeah. But I mean, God calls us to be
faithful, not successful, right? You
know, like I I understand like I'm a
demographer. I talk about this the the
growth and decline of these religious
groups, but at the end of the day, like
isn't part of what we're supposed to do
help help people think about the major
problems that the world's facing,
societyy's facing, they're personally
facing. Like, so if you're at that
little church that's declining in the
Midwest, I mean, what's your option at
this point? You're not going to like
start like a praise band and bring new
people in. Might as well preach the
gospel as best you understand it. and
sort of let the chips fall. That's a
fatalist position, by the way. I totally
understand that. But what's your
alternative?
>> No, I don't think it's a fatal. It's
certainly not a fatalist position if you
believe in God. Um, but that preaching
the gospel question, what about issues
of of belief, right? So one of one of
the narratives around mainline decline
has been yes it's somewhat about
politics and yes it's somewhat about
class and so on but the mainline also
seemed relative to more conservative and
evangelical churches at least in its
leadership to just not be as sure about
core doctrines of Christianity the
resurrection you know the miracles the
you know the the the literal stuff right
and that Even if you look at the
evangelical churches and say, "Oh, you
know, they're too partisan or they're
too ideological." You go to those
churches and they are talking about
Christ crucified and raised from the
dead and the forgiveness of sins and
these kinds of things.
>> Do you think that that is also a part of
the story of which churches grow in
which decline? The data says that, you
know, mainline clergy are definitely
much more squishy on these theological
issues than evangelical clergy are. But
I think this is this is like one of
those like haunting questions that I
have is a lot of people are doubters.
You know, they can never certainly
believe any doctrine of their church.
Like the pastor stands up and says
something very stridently and
confidently. And the people in the pews
go, "Yeah, I hope so or I guess so or
maybe that's true." You know, I just
think it's more prevalent in the
mainline than it is in the evangelical
church. And and let's be honest, Ross,
in the Catholic Church, it's widespread.
The people in the pews are not there
because they agree with the church's
teaching on a whole bunch of stuff. I
mean, a majority of Catholics are in
favor of abortion. You know, almost all
Catholics have used birth control. A
majority of Catholics are in favor of
female priests and yet they show up
because it's more than the belief thing.
It's something else going on there.
>> Yeah. I guess I would just, this isn't
my personal belief structure, but I feel
like someone could stay in the pews for
a long time disagreeing with the
Catholic Church about whether abortion
should be fully banned.
>> Mhm.
>> If they still believed that, you know,
the mass was what it claimed to be and
that Jesus rose from the dead. Yeah.
>> Do you think that
>> do you think that's right or do you
think do you think it's all sort of just
a continuum of
um political beliefs, supernatural
beliefs, and so on.
>> I I do think that the people who show up
generally do have a supernatural belief
in God. They do believe in the core.
>> But I think we can all admit that
throughout our lives that our core
beliefs have sort of been malleable and
we believe more and we believe less.
>> Absolutely.
>> You know, and what keeps us in the pew
then, right? If our our belief begins to
wne in the literal resurrection of Jesus
Christ, what keeps us going? I think
it's that social aspect of like we
expect you to be there. We would like
you to be there. You're a valuable
member of our community if you're there.
>> You're raising kids.
>> Exactly.
>> You know, you've got to take them to
church. Right. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Like I think it's it's you need
both and right. Like I don't think
there's a huge number of people who go
to church every Sunday who literally
believe in none of it. Right. I think a
lot of people show up and go, I hope I
believe or or some days I believe.
>> Lord help my unbelief.
>> Exactly. Right. Like like on my best day
I do believe these things. I guess I'm
just sort of interested in finding like,
you know, what is what is the unexpected
lever that changes religion in some way
in America, right? And so, you know, if
you had a bunch of liberal Protestant
pastors who were still political
liberals, but who suddenly were less
squishy on on the core religious
questions. I'm just interested in like
what does that what does that change?
And maybe the answer is not that much
that it's always just a numbers game. I
just think there's a there's a certain
number of people who will who are are
drawn to certainty.
>> Yeah.
>> And there are certain people who are
repelled from certainty. And what is
church look like for that second group?
Those doubtful people versus those
certain people. The mainline's always
been the refuge of the doubters, right?
Who who try their best to believe these
things but just can't get over the hump
sometimes. And if that goes away, if
you're Protestant, your only option is
the evangelical pastor who pounds the
pulpit and says, "If you don't believe
what we believe, you're going to hell."
And the person sitting there goes,
"Yeah, but how do you know that?"
>> You know, so I I think that's that's
what we're missing is this huge chunk of
people who were open to the idea of
belief are not going to have an outlet
to go to a place where they really do
feel like people like them are welcome
and the conversation's worthwhile
because it's going to be unless you
believe what we believe, you are less
than us. And I think people, why would
you want to go to a place where you feel
like you're less than voluntarily? I
mean, I certainly wouldn't.
>> And what's so then just just to go big
picture for America, what what is for
the non-religious person who's like, why
do I care about the Protestant mainline?
What is what is the takeaway of mainline
decline?
>> I mean, I there's something called
social contact theory. Gordon Alport
talked about it. It's just the idea like
being around people who are different
than you makes you more tolerant of of
those differences. And when we're so
cloistered, right, where it's just all
these people who believe all these core
beliefs about Jesus and gay people and
women pastors, you don't know the other
side. You never hear the other side of
the argument actually articulated in a
thoughtful, loving, careful way. You
just see the memes on Facebook about the
other side. And atheists are in the same
boat. They don't understand evangelicals
at all. And they basically create the
worst version of them in their minds
where they all hate gay people and they
all hate women and they're all super
concerned. They hate immigrants. And
it's like, no, the average evangelical
is not really there either. So I think
what we do is we create caricatures in
our mind because we never interface with
someone from the other side of the
aisle. And it's hard to hate people when
you know them, when you see them every
day.
>> And unfortunately, because we're
becoming so cloistered. The mainline
used to be the great meeting place.
Left, right, and center all hung out
together. And now all we've got is
really conservative religion and no
religion at all. And there's really no
meeting place between the two. All
right, let's use that as a segue into
larger questions about the future.
>> Yeah.
>> So, let's talk about the religious
America of 2050, right?
>> What parts of American Christianity are
growing right now?
>> Yeah. So, the rise of the nuns is the
number one story.
>> That's number one. But in among people
who are religiously affiliated, it's
non-denominational Christianity.
>> To me, that's the the second biggest
story is the rise of the nuns.
Non-denominationals. They were in the in
the general social survey, about 3% of
Americans said they were
non-denominational in 1972. Today it's
15% are non-denominational.
Denominationalism is in the decline
really across the board. The only large
Protestant denomination that's growing
consistently is the Assemblies of God,
which is sort of a a Pentecostal
evangelical denomination. And they're
they're doing really well actually. But
every other denomination, whether it be,
you know, Episcopalians, Presbyterians,
Baptist, Lutheran, they're all
significantly smaller today than they
were 20 or 30 years ago. So what the
future of American Christianity is going
to look, Protestant Christianity is
going to look like is very little
denominationalism and a whole bunch of
non-denominationalism,
which from an analytical standpoint is
incredibly hard to sort of wrap your
head around. Right.
>> Yeah. But I'm going to I'm going to ask
you to generalize. We were joking
earlier about the kind of cliched names
of non-denominational churches for
people who aren't familiar with that
world, right?
>> Um what is non-denominational
Protestantism right now? uh generally we
they're evangelical. I think we can I
mean not all of them but the vast vast
majority are evangelical in their
orientation and theology and just
practice and all the things that we
would call evangelical. I think the one
thing is they're anti-institutional. You
know they're anti- athority in a lot of
way. It's like where does your money go
when you put it in the plate? Well, it
goes right here. It stays right here in
these four walls. So what we're going to
have is a very sort of fragmented
Protestant Christianity that's you know
you got a little thieft here of 15,000
people in this church and 20,000 people
in this church. So I think the problem
is it's going to be harder to to
conceptualize to measure to to really
understand what these groups look like
because now you've got these little like
pockets like you got Joel Ostein right
in in Houston, Texas. He's an [snorts]
evangelical but he doesn't interface
with most other evangelicals. You got
Paula White down in Florida who Trump
loves but she's Pentecostal and believes
in the gifts of the spirit. So other
evang Franklin Franklin Graham would
never talk to Paula White. So you know
you've got all these little pockets that
they don't like sort of add up to a
cohesive what is evangelicalism. In 30
years that question is going to be
almost impossible to answer. Not that
it's easy now but it's going to be 10
times harder because of this amorphous
nature of non-denominationalism.
>> Does that depoliticize things? We were
talking about you know evangelical
identity as a kind of tribal political
identity. But if you're totally
fragmented and everyone is sort of loyal
to a particular pastor in a particular
setting, do you think that
non-denominational Christianity is less
Republican than the evangelicalism of
today or 10 years ago?
>> I think evangelicalism has been so
branded though as Republican it's kind
of hard to like shake that larger
mentality. But what you do see is you
sort of start seeing the cracks are
forming and like for instance a lot of
those churches are maleled and their
official doctrine is that you know only
men can be pastors but like on Mother's
Day they'll have the pastor's wife get
on stage with the pastor and talk about
like what it's like to be a mother and
so they're trying to like sort of like
half step away from conservative
evangelical orthodoxy. They won't make
plain their views on samesex marriage
but if you ask them like in private
they'll tell you oh we don't do gay
weddings. So they're not going to be as
strident because they want to grow. And
so a lot of them are sort of, you know,
but the the sermons they give are like
three ways to be a better p a better
father, two ways to be a better, you
know, Christian or church member or
whatever. It's sort of Christianity
light. But I mean, listen, at the end of
the day, the proof's in the pudding,
right? They're the only ones that have
shown growth in this era of
secularization. So what they have what
they're doing has to work at some level.
>> Does this just make American
Christianity more supernaturalist in
some way? You were you mentioned that a
lot of these churches are
Pentecostalist.
>> Pentecostalism for those who don't know
is you mentioned the gifts of the
spirit. It's very focused on speaking in
tongues, prophecy, healing.
>> Very different from the mood of old
school mainline Christianity, right? So
that's already changed. Does it change
more? Would you expect
>> religion as practiced in 2050 generally
to be more supernaturalist? I I think
that what is the common thread that runs
through religious growth not just in
America but across the world is
Pentecostalism what we call charismatic
worship which is what a lot of people
like see when they think of
non-denominationals is the drums the
guitars the raised hands the long
worship sets and so like this
emotionalism I think is actually a
predominant factor and this is where the
mainline loses by the way because I
don't know if you've been to mainline
church there's no emotional
>> I was I was raised Episcopalian in
southern Connecticut
>> so I have some familiar ity with
mainline customs.
>> Yeah. No raising of hands in those
churches. Huh.
>> No raising of hands, but also just, you
know, the the idea that Christianity is
a supernaturalist religion which is
woven into Catholicism in its own way,
saints and healings and so on.
>> Um, was altogether absent, right? And I
think you can tell a story where 1950s
American Christianity in some ways a
peak of Christian practice is also sort
of the least supernaturalist style of
Christianity, right?
>> The most intellectualized,
>> very intellectualized, very, you know,
very sort of suburban American way,
modern 20th century progress and so on.
>> And the equivalent, even if it is also
suburban today,
>> Yeah. is much more like you know we
baptized someone and you know he was
blind and he got his sight back like
this is a video I was literally watching
this morning because someone linked to
it right from I think from a mega church
right so that's that's just a bigger
part of Christianity now and going
forward
>> this is a great in the 1960s if you had
you went to a church where people raised
their hands and like rolled in the
aisles or had these big emotional
responses people would look at you like
you're an odd person and now millions of
people are engaging in that worship ship
all it it's it's been very normalized I
think in in modern America and I think
it it the downside of this is it leads
to a Christianity that's that's really
all heart and no head you know I think
the main line the problem with the main
line has always been is too much head
and too little heart you got to have
both in equal measure and and I don't
know there's no tradition by the way I
think it does a good job of sort of
targeting maybe the Catholic church Ross
to play a little
>> well that's our goal right that's that's
the Catholic goal but I think the
pattern with Catholicism has been
>> weird Weirdly or not weirdly,
Catholicism is now getting lots of not
just intellectual converts but sort of
>> you know would be elites who in the old
days would have become Episcopalian or
Presbyterian
>> now become if if they want to be
religious they're more likely to become
Catholic even as Catholicism which was
once like the big mass immigrant
workingclass religion it's losing ground
in that that territory. So there's an
odd religious dynamic of like Catholic
elites and evangelical
non-denominational
churches that are underrepresented in
elite society.
>> But I mean, look at the Trump
administration. Like JD Vance obviously
converted to Catholicism famously, but
Marco Rubio has always sort of like
walked halfway between.
>> He's he's been in both worlds.
>> Exactly. But I think that's a very
strategically smart thing to do. Not
just like nationally, but especially in
Florida because guess what? If you go to
a non-denominational church and a
Catholic church, you've checked off
religion in Florida for almost everyone.
So, I do think that like these elites
are not they're strategic in this.
>> You're so cynical about our our
political leaders, right?
>> What what what about race, ethnicity,
and immigration? You get a lot of
movement from Hispanic Catholicism into
Pentecostalism. Um, how much of these
changes are demographic changes? So, one
way that non-doms have actually done
well is by creating diverse
congregations because they're in diverse
areas. You know, if you're suburban
Houston, like for goodness sakes, it's
diverse. But I think, you know, the
Catholic Church in America would not be
what it would be without immigration,
especially from Central and South
America. The question though that we
have is how do they assimilate to
American culture? You know, for
instance, if you come here from, you
know, the southern border, you land in a
county that's overwhelmingly Catholic,
you'll stay Catholic. But let's say you
move to a place like suburban Dallas
where you know the the elite class are
all going to elevation and the journey.
Are you going to start moving in that
direction because you want to sort of
assimilate and be seen as part of polite
society and not segregating in your own
Hispanic community. That's an open
question that we don't really know the
answer to because it's it's happening
right now all across America, especially
second generation, too. So, you know,
you didn't you weren't raised in the
Catholic church in Mexico, so you don't
have the strongest connection as your
parents do. your parents want you to go
to mass but man all your friends are
going to that cool church down the road
what do you decide to do right so that's
a huge part of it but the other part of
the immigration story that's really
interesting is like if you look at like
Hinduism Islam Buddhism those are
immigrant religions like that that's how
they got a foothold in America
>> are they going if they can't rely on
immigrants because of the current
situation that we're in right now how do
they maintain or grow their size in the
United States when their fertility is
starting to look like American fertility
which is very low. So that's that's a
different story than bringing new people
in from overseas.
>> Is there any non-Christian religion that
you would expect to be more influential
in 2050 than it is today? That or to at
least something like the role that
Judaism eventually took on in 20th
century America.
>> I think Islam is going to have some some
influence in some pockets of America,
but most certainly not, you know, in in
a macrolevel nationwide way. You know,
we talk about Michigan obviously in
Dearbornne. That's a that's a majority
Muslim community now. It's the first
large one in America. But even there,
you've got to get to sort of a critical
mass. And it it doesn't look like a lot
of these religious groups are are ever
going to get there. So, I think the
reality is where they're geographically
located really kind of puts a ceiling on
their ability to influence the the
national political conversation.
>> Um, the Amish, I have to ask [laughter]
because well, because you're talking
about numbers and fertility, right? And
I have read fun demographic projections
that where that say guess what by 2075
>> 15% of you know Indiana and Pennsylvania
will be Amish. Is the 21st century the
Amish century? [laughter]
>> I you know in some odd way I actually
think they might have but here here's
the thing. Amish people typically stay
out of politics. That's been their
posture for a long long time now. You do
for now. But if you have a situation
where a substantial portion of southern
Pennsylvania is actually Amish, I think
it's more likely to happen in in
Midwestern states. But do you put any
stock in those kind of demographic
predictions?
>> I think at the local and county level, I
think there's a real possibility the
Amish could start winning elections and
changing policy, but and maybe even win
a state rep, you know, like you know,
something like that. But
>> but just forget politics.
>> Yes. Would would you bet on exponential
Amish growth?
>> I would I would bet on continued Amish
growth, but not exponential Amish growth
because as a religious tradition gets
bigger, it's it's harder to maintain its
cohesion like it had before. You know,
when you're 100 thousand people, like
everyone stays in the tribe because it's
like, you know, everyone. But once you
get to several million, I think this is
what the the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter Day Saints is facing right now is
it almost is a victim of its own success
because it got so large in America that
it's easier to leave now because you
don't feel that sense of internal
cohesion. There's not been a single
religious group in America that's got
incredibly large that's maintained its
growth rate all the way through. So
yeah, they will continue to grow
probably faster than other forms of
religion, but I just don't see a future
where the, you know, in 20 in 2100 if
the average Amish family is six kids and
they all stick in, you know, in in that
tradition. I would be shocked by that
because it would buck everything that we
know about how religion works in
America.
>> All right, I want I want to end by
pushing you towards wilder speculations
go and you can you can resist,
>> right? Um, but we're we're trying to
stay with the data here and you are a
>> uh partial debunker of overly
enthusiastic projections of revival or
anything else.
>> Yeah.
>> But you know, religious change in US
history to say nothing of the world
>> is often pretty weird.
>> It is.
>> And in the early 1800s, Thomas Jefferson
had this famous quote where he said, you
know, there's not a man young man today
alive who won't die a Unitarian.
>> Yes. and uh unitarianism was the you
know it was the rational faith of the
future in 1800 and then instead we got
tent revival, great awakenings,
everything else.
>> Just give me some thoughts about the
weirder things that you see as a student
of American religion and some kind of
speculation about just just the weirdest
thing you're keeping an eye on as a
future trend. I would say it's the
weirdest thing, but I think it's the the
rise of the tradath I think is really
interesting. For those of you who
listening at home, TRcasts are people
who reject Vatican 2. You know, the idea
that we should do the mass in English is
ridiculous. We should do the mass in
Latin. Women should cover their heads.
The priest should face the elements when
he blesses the elements. Like, we should
go back to the way it was 100 years ago
because that's when the Catholic Church
was strong in America. There's actually
an argument to be made that that might
actually be the future of Catholicism in
America because those families don't
practice birth control and they have
lots and lots of kids. But for
traditionalist Catholicism in whatever
form
>> Yeah.
>> Um to really take over US Catholicism,
you would like everything else, you
would need conversions. You you can't do
it with
>> large sevenkid families alone at least
over a, you know, 25 year time horizon,
right? Mhm.
>> You're speculating about a lot of people
who are right now not in that world,
>> joining that world.
>> I think you can see a lot of like
right-wing
regular Catholics would go and shift
over because they like the politics of
what that church means and how the
church is going. Now listen, I don't
think like in 50 years a majority of
American Catholics are going to be
enjoying the Latin mass, but I do think
it might be a significant minority and a
vocal minority too, which in some ways
is actually more important than actual
butts and seeds. The other thing I'll
say, and I think this is really, really
interesting, is the main line is
starting to take some cues from
evangelicalism and really focusing on
church planting, which is starting new
churches. So like the Episcopalians for
instance, if they find an interesting
young priest who seems, you know, like
really engaged, they'll give them a
whole bunch of money and say, "Go start
a church somewhere. You know, here's a
million dollars or $500,000. And if you
need more money, come back cuz guess
what? We've got a lot of money. We don't
have a lot of, you know, exciting young
priests." And so maybe, you know, church
planting has basically been exclusively
the purview of evangelicalism the last
30 years. And we're seeing some of this
on a small scale.
>> [snorts]
>> you know, Episcopalians might be coming
back because they're starting fresh.
They're not moving into an old building
with all this tradition. They're saying,
"No, no, let's let's lean into like the
journey and the ramp and the village,
but just in an episcopal way."
>> Like, listen, what's the alternative for
the mainline right now? It's it's
perpetual decline. So, you might as well
go out swinging. And I think some of
them have picked up on that message and
actually might be aggressive in church
planting in the future. And there might
be a future for the mainline.
>> Out of the mainline denominations,
>> who's going to make it? Would you bet on
the Episcopalians because they've hit B?
Like, I think this is an interesting
thing. Places hitting bottom and
actually benefiting from hitting bottom
sooner. Who do you bet on?
>> I think the Episcopalians because of
their institutional heft and their, you
know, financial support to be honest
with you are going to last for a very
long time. I think the United Methodists
are going to continue to persist because
there's just still a ton of United
Methodist like four and a half million
even today after the schism and I think
getting over the schism is going to sort
of like okay we've gotten over the worst
of it now we can sort of survive with
what we have. I do wonder if there's
going to be some sort of mergers or at
least friendly cooperation between the
Lutheran and the Presbyterians.
We call them the seven sisters in the
mainline right now. In 50 years there's
certainly not going to be seven sisters.
>> Who else who else are you would you bet
on? Which out of the small groups in
America from Eastern Orthodoxy
>> to non-Christian religions,
>> who do you think is big in 2050?
Surprisingly big.
>> Yeah. So, there's these little little
bitty denominations that are actually
doing really well and grow like the
Anglican Church North America, which is
sort of the more conservative wing of
the Episcopal Church. They're only
125,000 people, but they've had
sustained growth now for the last 15
years. They're a very new denomination,
by the way, which I think actually works
in their favor because it's like they're
combining the best versions of
evangelicalism with the best versions of
the mainline, which I think is really
successful. There's a group called the
PCA, Presbyterian Church in America,
which is uh Tim Keller, who is, you
know, a very famous preacher, was a was
a prominent member of the PCA. They've
grown consistently now for 30 years, and
I think they're going to continue to go
up. But, you know, I think like the
Orthodox Church is probably going to,
you know, do relatively well. But by
relatively well, I mean like they might
add 25% membership in the next 30 years.
We're not talking there's not going to
be there. We're never going to see a
mega denomination like the Southern
Baptist Convention or the United
Methodist Church ever again in ever
again because
>> all right you'll have to come back to
this show when I'm on my last talk to my
AI avatar. And on that last that can be
the last question. New religions. Yeah,
>> we haven't really talked about
>> the role of the internet. I think it's
sort of the the ground underlying a lot
of the trends you're talking about. But
when you look at everything from online
life in general to how people relate to
AI and so on, do you see something
genuinely new emerging in that space or
is it all too soon to tell? I see the
the role of the internet actually being
somewhat destructive to American
religion in that it shows you all the
bad things in a very compelling way. You
know, like why do they not believe this
or why are they inconsistent on this
thing or did you know the church's
history on this is bad? You know what's
really interesting is like so we had the
co thing. We're like, we're going to
move church online and n over 90% of
church were streaming online right after
co
>> and what we realized is that online
church does not do any of the positive
things that we thought in person church.
And I think you know like we did oh
we're going to work from home and guess
what now everyone's back to working in
the office three or four days a week.
Like nothing that we've seen created
online seems like it has any legs to it.
Even among young people who attend
online and in person, twothirds of them
prefer attending in person and 15%
prefer online and the other 15% don't
care either way. Like so even young
people are not drawn to digital
anything. Listen, religion's endured for
all of Western civilization because it
works for lots and lots of people. And
no matter how much we try to remake it
with technology and AI and the internet,
showing up on an average Sunday with a
bunch of people and singing some songs
and saying some creeds and hearing a
sermon is is transformative and and will
be for for for all of human history as
far as I can tell.
>> All right, that's a bold prediction and
a good place to end. Ryan Burge, thank
you so much for joining me.
>> It's been [music] a pleasure.
>> [music]
>> Hey,
hey, hey. [music]